Add journaling blog post (#16692)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/journaling/index.md

---
title: "Speeding up Pulumi deployments by up to 10x"

date: 2025-12-08T17:57:55+02:00

draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.

> meta_desc: Learn how journaling helps speed up your deployments in large stacks up to 10x, while maintaining full data integrity guarantees throughout the update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meta_desc: Pulumi deployments get up to 10x faster with journaling, a new snapshotting approach that speeds up large stacks while keeping full data integrity.
```

# ratio has been provided for you.
meta_image: meta.png

# At least one author is required. The values in this list correspond with the
# `id` properties of the team member files at /data/team/team. Create a file for
# yourself if you don't already have one.
authors:
    - thomas-gummerer

# At least one tag is required. Lowercase, hyphen-delimited is recommended.
tags:
    - journaling
    - performance
    - data-integrity

# The social copy used to promote this post on Twitter and Linkedin. These
# properties do not actually create the post and have no effect on the
# generated blog page. They are here strictly for reference.

# Here are some examples of posts we have made in the past for inspiration:
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7171191945841561601
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7169021002394296320
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7155606616455737345
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1763265391042654623
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1762900472489185492
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1755637618631405655

social:
    twitter: Speeding up your Pulumi deployments by 10x

>     linkedin: Want faster Pulumi deployments on big stacks? Read on how we improved the performance of Pulumi deployments with lots of resources by up to 10x, and how you can get access to it today.

Reviewer: **Pulumi Deployments Get Up to 10x Faster**

Large Pulumi stacks just got a major performance boost. Here's what changed.

**The Problem**
Pulumi saves snapshots at every deployment step to maintain data integrity. For large stacks, this creates a bottleneck: uploading the full snapshot serially slows everything down.

**The Solution: Journaling**
Instead of sending the whole snapshot, journaling sends only individual changes. These journal entries can go in parallel, and Pulumi Cloud reconstructs the full snapshot on the backend.

**The Results**
In benchmarks on a 3,000+ resource stack:
- Time dropped from 58 minutes to 3 minutes
- Network traffic cut from 16.5MB to 2.3MB

**Why This Matters**
You get the speed without sacrificing data integrity. Unlike SKIP_CHECKPOINTS, journaling still tracks all in-flight operations. If something fails mid-deployment, Pulumi still knows exactly what happened.

**Get Started**
This feature is in opt-in testing. Reach out on Pulumi Community Slack or through Support to get your org enrolled. Then set PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING=true.

Read more: [link]

# See the blogging docs at https://github.com/pulumi/docs/blob/master/BLOGGING.md
# for details, and please remove these comments before submitting for review.
---

> Pulumi saves a snapshot of the current state of your cloud infrastructure at every deployment, and also at every step of the deployment. This means that Pulumi always has a current view of the state even if there are crashes during an operation. However, this comes with a performance penalty especially for large stacks. Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up deployments up to 10x. Read on for benchmarks and some technical details of the implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pulumi saves a snapshot of the current state of your cloud infrastructure at every deployment, and also at every step of the deployment. This means that Pulumi always has a current view of the state even if there is an issue during an operation. However, this comes with a performance penalty especially for large stacks. Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up deployments up to 10x. Read on for benchmarks and some technical details of the implementation.
```

Maybe slightly softer "issue" instead of "crashes". This also covers things like the network dropping, or it being a problem on the cloud side.

> Pulumi saves a snapshot of the current state of your cloud infrastructure at every deployment, and also at every step of the deployment. This means that Pulumi always has a current view of the state even if there is an issue during an operation. However, this comes with a performance penalty especially for large stacks. Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up deployments up to 10x. Read on for benchmarks and some technical details of the implementation.

Reviewer: > at every **deployment**

Is **deployment** the term we want to use? Operation? Update?

<!--more-->

> ## Benchmarks

Reviewer: I get you're trying to "get to the good stuff", but consider moving this to after "why is it slow".

Before getting into the more technical details, here's a number of benchmarks demonstrating what this new experience looks like. To run the benchmarks we picked a couple of Pulumi projects, one that can be set up massively parallel, which is the worst case scenario for the old snapshot system, and another one that looks a little more like a real world example.  Note that all of these benchmarks were conducted in Europe connecting to Pulumi Cloud, which runs in `us-west-2`, so exact numbers may vary based on your location and internet connection. This should however give a good indication of the performance improvements.

We're benchmarking two somewhat large stacks, both of which are or were used at Pulumi. The first program sets up a website using AWS bucket objects. We're using the [example-ts-static-website](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-static-website) example here, but expand it a little bit to set up a version of our docs site. This means we're setting up more than 3000 bucket objects, with 3222 resources in total.

> The benchmarks were measured using `time` built-in command and using the best time in a best-of-three benchmarks. The network traffic using `tcpdump`, limiting the measured traffic to only the IP addresses for Pulumi Cloud. Finally `tshark` was used to process the packet captures and count the bytes sent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The benchmarks were measured using `time` built-in command and using the best time in a best-of-three benchmark. The network traffic was measured using `tcpdump`, limiting the measured traffic to only the IP addresses for Pulumi Cloud. Finally `tshark` was used to process the packet captures and count the bytes sent.
```

|--------------------|--------|------------|
| Without journaling | 58m26s | 16.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 03m05s | 2.3MB      |
| Skip checkpoints   | 01m33s | 0.5MB      |

The second example is setting up an instance of the Pulumi app and API. Here we'll have an example that's a bit more dominated by the cost of setting up the actual infrastructure in the cloud, but we still have a very noticeable improvement in the time it takes to set up the stack.

|                    | Time   | Bytes sent |
|--------------------|--------|------------|
| Without journaling | 17m52s | 18.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 9m45s  | 5.9MB      |
| Skip checkpoints   | 8m39s  | 2MB        |

Note that this feature is still behind a feature flag, but we are ready for testers. To get enrolled in the feature flag, please reach out to us, either on the [Community Slack](https://slack.pulumi.com/), or through our [Support channels](https://support.pulumi.com/hc/en-us). Once that's done, all you need to do is to set the `PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING` environment variable to `true`, and your deployments will start finishing faster.

If you are interested in the more technical details read on!

> ## Introduction into snapshotting

Reviewer: I would make this the first section, before benchmarks; otherwise, the user doesn't know what's being benchmarked

To make sure there are never any resources that are not tracked, even if a deployment is aborted unexpectedly (for example due to network issues, power outages, or bugs), Pulumi creates a new snapshot at the beginning and at the end of each operation.

At the beginning of the operation, Pulumi adds a new "pending operation" to the snapshot. Pending operations declare the intent to mutate a resource. If a pending operation is left in the snapshot (in other words the operation started, but Pulumi couldn't record the end of it), in the next operation Pulumi asks the user to check the actual state of the resource, and then either removes it from the snapshot, or imports it depending on the users input.

This is because it is possible that the resource has been set up correctly, or it is possible that the resource creation failed. If Pulumi aborted midway through the operation it's impossible to know which it is.

> Once an operation finished, the pending operation is removed, as we now know the final state of the resource, and the final state of the resource is updated in the snapshot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once an operation finishes, the pending operation is removed, as we now know the final state of the resource, and the final state of the resource is updated in the snapshot.
```

There's also some additional metadata that is stored in the snapshot, that is only updated infrequently.

> Here's how the snapshot looks in code. This snapshot is serialized and sent to the backend. `Resources` holds the list of known resource state, and is updated after each operation finishes, and `PendingOperations` is the list of pending operations described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's how the snapshot looks in code. This snapshot is serialized and sent to the backend. `Resources` holds the list of known resource states, and is updated after each operation finishes, and `PendingOperations` is the list of pending operations described above.
```

- Since tests can't cover all possible edge cases, the next step was to run the journaler in parallel with the current snapshotting implementation internally. This was still without sending the results to the service. However we would compare the snapshot, and send an error event to the service if the snapshot didn't match. In our data warehouse we could then inspect any mismatches, and fix them. Since this does involve the service in a minor way, we would only do this if the user is using the Cloud backend.
- Next up was adding a feature flag for the service, so journaling could be turned on selectively for some orgs. At the same time we implemented an opt-in environment variable in the CLI (`PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING`), so the feature could be selectively turned on by users, if both the feature flag is enabled and the user sets the environment variable. This way we could slowly start enabling this in our repos, e.g. first in the integration tests for `pulumi/pulumi`, then in the tests for `pulumi/examples` and `pulumi/templates`, etc.

> - Allow users to start opting in.  If you want to opt-in with your org, please reach out to us, either on the [Community Slack](https://slack.pulumi.com/), or through our [Support channels](https://support.pulumi.com/hc/en-us), and we'll opt your org into the feature flag. Then you can begin seeing the performance improvements by setting the `PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING` env variable to true.

Reviewer: This is the action we want a user to take so let's consider how we can hoist it out of the list so it's more apparent, such as "what we've done so far" and "what we're doing now"

---
title: "Speeding up Pulumi deployments by up to 20x"

date: 2025-12-08T17:57:55+02:00

draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.

> meta_desc: Pulumi deployments get up to 20x faster with journaling, a new snapshotting approach that speeds up large stacks while keeping full data integrity.

Reviewer 3: (happy to keep the existing wording, though, if folks disagree)

> meta_desc: Pulumi deployments get up to 20x faster with journaling, a new snapshotting approach that speeds up large stacks while keeping full data integrity.

Author: Yeah, @kramhuber has suggested the same, I've renamed everything from deployments to operations now. Agree that it could otherwise be confused with the product.

meta_image: meta.png

authors:
    - thomas-gummerer

tags:
    - journaling
    - performance
    - data-integrity

social:
    twitter: |
        Pulumi deployments just got up to 20x faster:

        - Journaling: Send only changes, not full snapshots
        - Data integrity: No compromise on reliability
        - Network traffic cut by 85%+ on large stacks

        Try it: [link]
    linkedin: |
        # Pulumi Deployments Get Up to 20x Faster

        Large Pulumi stacks just got a major performance boost. Here's what changed.

        # The Problem
        Pulumi saves snapshots at every deployment step to maintain data integrity. For large stacks, this creates a bottleneck: uploading the full snapshot serially slows everything down.

        # The Solution: Journaling

>         Instead of sending the whole snapshot, journaling sends only individual changes. These journal entries can go in parallel, and Pulumi Cloud reconstructs the full snapshot on the backend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Instead of sending the whole snapshot, journaling sends only individual changes. These journal entries can be written in parallel, and Pulumi Cloud can reconstruct the full snapshot on the backend.
```

        # The Results

>         In benchmarks on a 3,000+ resource stack:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        In benchmarks when creating a 3,000+ resource stack:
```

        Read more: [link]

---

Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up deployments up to 20x. At every deployment, and at every step within a deployment, Pulumi saves a snapshot of your cloud infrastructure. This gives Pulumi a current view of state even if something fails mid-operation, but it comes with a performance penalty for large stacks. Here's how we fixed it.

<!--more-->

## Benchmarks

Before getting into the more technical details, here are a number of benchmarks demonstrating what this new experience looks like. To run the benchmarks we picked a couple of Pulumi projects, one that can be set up massively parallel, which is the worst case scenario for the old snapshot system, and another one that looks a little more like a real world example.  Note that all of these benchmarks were conducted in Europe connecting to Pulumi Cloud, which runs in `us-west-2`, so exact numbers may vary based on your location and internet connection. This should however give a good indication of the performance improvements.

> We're benchmarking two somewhat large stacks, both of which are or were used at Pulumi. The first program sets up a website using AWS bucket objects. We're using the [example-ts-static-website](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-static-website) example here, but expand it a little bit to set up a version of our docs site. This means we're setting up more than 3000 bucket objects, with 3222 resources in total.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're benchmarking two somewhat large stacks, both of which are or were used at Pulumi. The first program sets up a website using AWS bucket objects. We're using the [aws-ts-static-website](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-static-website) example here, but expand it a little bit to set up a version of our docs site. This means we're setting up more than 3000 bucket objects, with 3222 resources in total.
```

| Without journaling | 58m26s | 16.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 03m05s | 2.3MB      |
| Skip checkpoints   | 01m33s | 0.5MB      |

The second example is setting up an instance of the Pulumi app and API. Here we'll have an example that's a bit more dominated by the cost of setting up the actual infrastructure in the cloud, but we still have a very noticeable improvement in the time it takes to set up the stack.

|                    | Time   | Bytes sent |
|--------------------|--------|------------|
| Without journaling | 17m52s | 18.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 9m45s  | 5.9MB      |
| Skip checkpoints   | 8m39s  | 2MB        |

![Time taken](time.png)

![Data sent](size.png)

*Note that this feature is still behind a feature flag, but we are ready for testers. To get enrolled in the feature flag, please reach out to us, either on the [Community Slack](https://slack.pulumi.com/), or through our [Support channels](https://support.pulumi.com/hc/en-us). Once that's done, all you need to do is to set the `PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING` environment variable to `true`, and your deployments will start finishing faster.*

If you are interested in the more technical details read on!

> ## Introduction into snapshotting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Introduction to snapshotting
```

To make sure there are never any resources that are not tracked, even if a deployment is aborted unexpectedly (for example due to network issues, power outages, or bugs), Pulumi creates a new snapshot at the beginning and at the end of each operation.

At the beginning of the operation, Pulumi adds a new "pending operation" to the snapshot. Pending operations declare the intent to mutate a resource. If a pending operation is left in the snapshot (in other words the operation started, but Pulumi couldn't record the end of it), in the next operation Pulumi asks the user to check the actual state of the resource, and then either removes it from the snapshot, or imports it depending on the users input. This is because it is possible that the resource has been set up correctly, or it is possible that the resource creation failed. If Pulumi aborted midway through the operation it's impossible to know which it is.

> Once an operation finishes, the pending operation is removed, as we now know the final state of the resource, and the final state of the resource is updated in the snapshot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once an operation finishes, the pending operation is removed and the resource's final state is recorded in the snapshot.
```

> There's also some additional metadata that is stored in the snapshot, that is only updated infrequently.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There's also some additional metadata that is stored in the snapshot that is only updated infrequently.
```

However, the snapshotting is still a major bottleneck for large Pulumi deployments. Having to serially upload the snapshot twice for each step does still have a big impact on performance, especially if many resources are modified in parallel.

## Fast, but lacking data integrity?

As long as Pulumi can complete its operation, there's no need for the intermediate checkpoints. It is possible to set the `PULUMI_SKIP_CHECKPOINTS` variable to a truthy value, and skip all the uploading of the intermittent checkpoints to the backend. This, of course, avoids the single serialization point we have sending the snapshots to the backend, and thus makes the operation much more performant.

> However, it also has the big disadvantage that it's compromising some of the data integrity guarantees Pulumi gives you. If anything goes wrong during the update, Pulumi has no notion of what happened until then, potentially leaving orphaned resources in the provider, or leaving resources in the state that no longer exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, it also has the serious disadvantage of compromising some of the data integrity guarantees Pulumi gives you. If anything goes wrong during the update, Pulumi has no notion of what happened until then, potentially leaving orphaned resources in the provider, or leaving resources in the state that no longer exist.
```

        Large Pulumi stacks just got a major performance boost. Here's what changed.

        # The Problem
        Pulumi saves snapshots at every deployment step to maintain data integrity. For large stacks, this creates a bottleneck: uploading the full snapshot serially slows everything down.

        # The Solution: Journaling
        Instead of sending the whole snapshot, journaling sends only individual changes. These journal entries can be written in parallel, and Pulumi Cloud can reconstruct the full snapshot on the backend.

        # The Results
        In benchmarks when creating a 3,000+ resource stack:

            Time dropped from 58 minutes to 2.5 minutes
            Network traffic cut from 16.5MB to 2.3MB

        # Why This Matters
        You get the speed without sacrificing data integrity. Journaling still tracks all in-flight operations. If something fails mid-deployment, `pulumi` knows exactly what happened.

        # Get Started
        This feature is in opt-in testing. Reach out on Pulumi Community Slack or through Support to get your org enrolled. Then set PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING=true.

        Read more: [link]

---

> Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up operations by up to 20x. At every deployment, and at every step within a deployment, `pulumi` saves a snapshot of your cloud infrastructure. This gives `pulumi` a current view of state even if something fails mid-operation, but it comes with a performance penalty for large stacks. Here's how we fixed it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today we're introducing an improvement that can speed up operations by up to 20x. At every operation, and at every step within an operation, `pulumi` saves a snapshot of your cloud infrastructure. This gives `pulumi` a current view of state even if something fails mid-operation, but it comes with a performance penalty for large stacks. Here's how we fixed it.
```

We're benchmarking two somewhat large stacks, both of which are or were used at Pulumi. The first program sets up a website using AWS bucket objects. We're using the [aws-ts-static-website](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-static-website) example here, but expand it a little bit to set up a version of our docs site. This means we're setting up more than 3000 bucket objects, with 3222 resources in total.

The benchmarks were measured using the `time` built-in command and using the best time in a best-of-three benchmark. The network traffic was measured using `tcpdump`, limiting the measured traffic to only the IP addresses for Pulumi Cloud. Finally, `tshark` was used to process the packet captures and count the bytes sent.

All the benchmarks are run with journaling off (the default experience), with journaling on (the new experience).

|                    | Time   | Bytes sent |
|--------------------|--------|------------|
| Without journaling | 58m26s | 16.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 02m50s | 2.3MB      |

> These numbers are for setting up the stack from scratch. Now let's have a look at what this looks like if we only change half the resources, but the remaining ones remain unchanged:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now let's have a look at what this looks like if we only change half the resources, but the remaining ones remain unchanged:
```

| With journaling    | 01m45s | 2.3MB      |

The second example is setting up an instance of the Pulumi app and API. Here we'll have an example that's a bit more dominated by the cost of setting up the actual infrastructure in the cloud, but we still have a very noticeable improvement in the time it takes to set up the stack.

|                    | Time   | Bytes sent |
|--------------------|--------|------------|
| Without journaling | 17m52s | 18.5MB     |
| With journaling    | 9m12s  | 5.9MB      |

![Comparison chart of the timings shown in the tables above](time.png)

![Comparison chart of the bytes sent shown in the tables above](size.png)

*Note that this feature is still behind a feature flag, but we are ready for testers. To get enrolled in the feature flag, please reach out to us, either on the [Community Slack](https://slack.pulumi.com/), or through our [Support channels](https://support.pulumi.com/hc/en-us). Once that's done, all you need to do is to set the `PULUMI_ENABLE_JOURNALING` environment variable to `true`, and your operations will start finishing faster.*

If you are interested in the more technical details read on!

## Introduction to snapshotting

> `pulumi` keeps track of all resources in a stack in a snapshot. This snapshot is stored in the stack's configured backend, which is either the Pulumi Cloud or a DIY backend. Further operations of the stack then use this snapshot to figure out which resources need to be created, updated or deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`pulumi` keeps track of all resources in a stack in a snapshot. This snapshot is stored in the stack's configured backend, which is either the Pulumi Cloud or a DIY backend. Future operations on the stack then use this snapshot to figure out which resources need to be created, updated or deleted.
```
